I'm just gonna say that because this is the kind of
conference that it is with many streams of information and in some
cases multiple sources of truth you may have seen that the title
of my talk is landslide you may also have seen the
title of my talk is hold fast both things are true at
the same time because I gave Ted the information at different times
so we're doing landslide hold fast one more glitch so
hi I'm Erin I alternate between trying to
figure out what the social internet is doing to us and trying
to use it to get better information to more people in more
places so right now I'm doing network thinking and projects at
my mini studio wreckage salvage and also co-running a
networked volunteer and mutual aid information project at unbreaking also
a project of the raft foundation raft foundation and we work to
nail down knowledge about what our government is doing to us in
the United States before that I co-founded the COVID tracking project
that was to help people understand what was happening in
2020 through public data and before that I was at a journalist
journalism tech community that came out of the Moz foundation and before
that it was all over the early web so that's the
nature of my work I use the tools and I try to
improve the tools and then I repeat and what I learned from
yesterday's amazing pre-conference experience is that many of you
are in much the same position which I love it's like
a whole room of corner cases favorite so I want to know
what the networks are doing to us and what resources that people
like us have to draw from to shape our networks in ways
that ground and reorient our communities in useful knowledge and you
know to maybe someday live together in peace and mutual respect so
right before the end of last year I posted I posted another
extremely long blog post which is my jam called landslide a
ghost story in which I tried to get closer to the core
of our network's role in disorienting and disintegrating
us and I'll talk about that one a little bit here
because the new work I'm bringing builds on it but this
talk I think and I hope is kind of a turning point
for my work and what I can bring to you because I
think I finally have a good enough handle on at least parts
of this to be able to offer some paths forward that aren
't either unattainable or just like disproportionately paltry
and I'm going to make a side note I take it
as a given that one major underlying problem that prevents us from
dealing with many other problems is centralization and lock-in which
decentralized networks are here to deal with and I just want to
say I think that Jay and the rest of blue skies founding
team have done us all a tremendous service by yes making blue
sky the app but especially in using all of that available momentum
to get this protocol ecosystem off the ground and stable enough to
support the kind of independent development that I saw happening yesterday and
we'll be talking about here so I assume basically universal conc
ordance about this I'm not going to spend a lot
of time talking about it but I am so grateful for the
work that the team has accomplished I just want to say that
so there's so much good stuff happening around the protocol and
I'm super psyched to see the next batch of it
today yesterday was incredible the work I have been doing is for
you and I brought a lot of things so let's get
to it 62 years ago yesterday on Good Friday in 1964 a
tectonic plate up under Alaska slid under another te
ctonic plate and produced an extraordinarily strong and sustained earthquake that
we now know to be the second highest magnitude magnitude quake
in recorded history it actually reshaped the field of seism
ology but more immediately it caused parts of the Alaskan
coast to drop by nearly 40 feet rise by nearly 40 feet
dropped others down below sea level triggered enormous tsunamis and according
to geologists it was so big that it rang the planet
like a bell Alaska is not densely populated but this is
what the earthquake looked like in this is an anchorage in
cities and towns you see the kind of damage you'd expect
it tore up streets and knocked down buildings and in Alaska 13
9 people died it also also did something exceptionally weird and horrific
in the port town of Valdez Valdez is
the northernmost year-round ice-free deep water port in North
America and the southern end of the Trans-Alaska oil
pipeline my partner grew up in Valdez so I heard
about the earthquake and how weird it had been from him and
my father-in-law worked at the Valdez museum and
had produced a video from some of this really wild grainy
contemporary footage of the quake so when we went up to
visit I got to see that and then much later my family
moved to the Cascadia subduction zone and I became
an earthquake nerd as one does and like I sort of just
poked at this story and the records out of Valde
z as part of my like insomnia rounds of upsetting things
to look at in the middle of the night but it kind
of stayed in the background until the end of last year when
I discovered that the U.
S.
Geological Survey had produced a new cut of that weird film
footage from the Valdez harbor um and I'm not
going to show it to you but it is in the uh
the landslide post on my site um the footage only existed
because a supply ship the SS China had come into the harbor
right before the quake and someone on the ship happened to
have an eight millimeter camera and happened to be filming the crew
just like dorking around on deck and throwing oranges and
candy to the kids who'd come down to the dock to
meet the ship um but I'd only ever seen the footage
in a form that turned out to be highly manipulated and the
reconstructed cut from USGS revealed that the shots we always
thought were of the water of the the local tsunami produced by
the quake were actually of the land um which had just
turned to liquid and flowed and flowed out from under
everything it was supporting and that's what used to be the
harbor and it all just fell in the sea and the footage
actually shows it just like pouring out from under these buildings that
resequenced footage remains the single most upsetting piece of film
I have ever seen because the destabilization it depicts is
happening at the level of basic physics which is gross and weird
um so here's what happened in Valdez based on
everything we know now the town was built on glacial mor
aine which is this disorganized debris piled up by
glacier and down near the shoreline that jumble of like
unconsolidated rock and sand went down 600 feet
before you hit bedrock and building on the moraine was
not like an obviously bad idea because it was still solid ground
you could step on it or drive on it and it's
fine because the contact forces between the particles would distribute the load
but Valdez is also extremely wet uh in the winter
it snows so much people have to shovel their roofs to
keep them from collapsing and the water table down there by the
shoreline is just a few feet from the surface of the
town so in late March of 1964 between that just like barely
subterranean water and the melt from these exceptionally heavy sn
ows that loose jumbled substrate was flooded was completely saturated and
it turns out that when series of extraordinarily heavy and repeated shocks
like this particular earthquake hit a loose substrate that's also completely
saturated with water the compression hits the water and pushes all those
particles apart and the solids just turn into liquid almost instantly and
flow away from these exceptionally heavy snows from these exceptionally heavy
snows that loose jumbled substrate was flooded was completely saturated
and it turns out that when series of extraordinarily heavy and repeated
shocks like this particular earthquake hit a loose substrate that's also
completely saturated with water the compression hits the water and pushes all
those particles apart and the solids just turn into liquid almost instantly
and flow away and everything falls in and in Valdez
the whole harbor float away and took out everything and everyone on
it so this is the the three-part model of how this
particularly horrific thing works we've seen this elsewhere now but we
never had especially we never had footage of anything like this there
were like some very loose records of what's called soil li
quefaction don't recommend that you go look for videos
of soil liquefaction I was down this rabbit hole
in December the same time I was trying to take stock of
almost a year of work at unbreaking where we're just
kind of down slogging through the mud of our information landscape
and I was trying to understand like the networks piece and also
the underlying like journalism shaped stuff that's supposed to produce distrib
utable knowledge and how our collective understanding was fairing against repeated
and violent shocks so I wrote a lot of words about the
information substrate and the saturation and flooding of network based overload and
how those two things together produce a colossal vulnerability to shocks
and I'm going to lay those out super quickly here just
to get them on the table so we can move on to
the good stuff so starting with the substrate in the US where
I'm from and in many other parts of the world our
underlying foundational knowledge systems have taken a lot of damage like the
business model underlying our media continues down this decades long death spiral
and media consolidation which preceded the damage wrought by the
internet by many decades continues to degrade and squeeze and hollow
out a lot of our most well former most trustworthy sources of
current information basic analysis but it's not just journalism extractive
practices that every part of the knowledge production chain has dealt tremendous
damage to our whole ecosystem I have on my hard drive enough
for like a dozen talks about what's happened to basic research
and peer review and academic presses and general presses and even like
web search the niches that used to support independent writers and
artists and some of our most recent knowledge consolidating institutions like
stack overflow and Wikipedia are beginning to suffer and all of this
hollowing out has been accompanied by an upwelling of things
that we wouldn't traditionally call news that range from genuinely vital
eyewitness videos through outright and well funded propaganda farms to
purely fact-free slop and all of this is enmeshed
the news organizations primarily devoted to discrediting real reporting and
presented through social platforms that in many cases deliberately shape the subset
of available information to evade responsibility for misinformation and also to
suit sort of our own worst selves desires so this is not
great and then we also have just the massive proliferation of
information the proliferation of information that I feel like we've
just about lost a way to talk about maybe because we're
so buried in it the science folks bring it up and that
was extremely heartening to hear them acknowledging that's what they
do that the knowledge crafting but this phenomenon of exponential hyper prol
iferation and information overload is a real one with a large and
solid body of evidence about its genuinely damaging psychological and emotional and
physical effects and and we've been making filters and developing practices
to cope with this with too much information since we invented writing
and complaining about it the whole time the history of information overload
is is amazing but our latest filters including web search and social
media algorithms and now the LLMs are not necessarily filtering
our flood in ways that actually serve us well and
many of us to have lost faith and many of us to
have lost faith in some of the sort of stolid older
filters because we can see that they're not representing the reality
that we find in eyewitness videos and first person accounts
so maybe we decide to let go of those filters too and
the more filters we opt out of the more we expose ourselves
to the flood but at least when we do that we're
getting access to more knowledge right we're getting access to more
and more and more and more and more and more and more
social scientists have spent a lot of time and funding trying to
figure out and the emerging consensus is that for most people most
of the time keeping up with current events via our social feeds
produces something very near to near to zero gains in our knowledge
about civics and politics we see a lot of things go
by and we feel a lot of feelings about them but by
and large we are not actually building much knowledge in our human
brains but I feel kind of cautious about this research because it
blends together a lot of different ways to use social media and
I think those of us in this room are probably outliers
in how we use it and in most cases like news you
know the researchers are just talking about a specific thing which is
news to link story links to news stories being passed around and
not you know like mega threads of analysis or videos by particularly
gifted explainers but even with those caveats the numbers are
not good there's a very recent and thorough meta meta-anal
ysis on whether we gain political or civic knowledge from social media
exposure that has persuasive results that on the whole we really
just don't which doesn't mean that outliers don't
exist but it does mean unless we're only building for out
liers we should recognize that the combination of social media and human
brains does not on average produce workable knowledge about what's
happening so that's bad but there's worse we also have
pretty solid although somewhat less evidenced research that on the whole
we don't just fail to learn things from our social feeds
we also come away from them feeling more confident in our knowledge
that we don't have which is also closely connected to my
all-time least favorite research on cognition which is on the illusion
of explanatory depth who who knows about the illusion of explan
atory depth oh great okay we'll get to that later for
now I want to underline that not knowing things we might
need to know is bad but lacking the epistemic humility
to know that we might need to go learn them is probably
worse and then there's the emotional dimension of the flood which
I want to talk about in strictly human terms terms and without
laundering it through social science which is not to pick on
the highbrow moral panic about the internet folks although it
is but I think many of our dominant critical lenses on our
networks and what they do to society are essentially laundering genuine
affective feelings trouble through selective and often irresponsibly represented social
science and neurological research to present themselves as unshakably author
itative policy prescriptions and I took the anxious generation slide out
of this talk but please note that it was there there are
responsible ways to work with the science and I try to be
really cautious when I an epistemic trespasser do it
but we don't even need it for conversations among ourselves because
the affective stuff is real and we experience countless ephem
eral sort of news-shaped bids for our attention every day
and most of us who hang out online experience them through highly
emotive feeds that lean toward volume and speed and never-ending
context collapse so for a lot of us it just feels bad
and this is the saturating flood and then we get the
shocks and and in the landslide essay I focused pretty narrow
ly on the Trump regimes attack on the idea of truth and
on every viable model of building knowledge but the more important attack
from the administration is that they are just doing deranged n
onsensical bullshit all the time
thank you and and what that does to our ability to understand
the world is still not as bad as what they are actually
doing to people and to economies and to countries and to sovere
ignties but it's still very bad because the only
way out of this barring international intervention is for Americans to
pull our brains together and act and I don't know what
your personal networks look like but a lot of people in almost
every part of mine and all my overlapping circles spent a lot
of the last year in a state of real disorientation
about things like how is this not breaking the law and what
is the law even and this was true for almost everyone except
for the folks who knew in advance that they would be targeted
and were paying a different kind of attention but also unfortunately one
bad regime is not the only kind of shock that we're
experiencing or will experience so I've spent the last few months
reading more deeply in the research and also continuing to plug away
in the info mines that unbreaking and bashing on some
possibilities for building ourselves out of this mess which is what I
want to talk about next but first I want to briefly say
why I think this work belongs here at this protocol conference more
than just about anywhere else when I write about the fallout
of our global networks some of the points I come to echo
ones that many much fancier critics have covered but I tend
to reach different conclusions than they do because I am focused on
builders and they are mostly writing toward individualistic remedies or toward
regulation and I have been alive for a lot of the internet
so far and I have absolutely no faith in either of those
pathways at this time we are not going to disconnect from each
other it's just not going to happen and our regulators are
mostly speaking for my own country working from cartoon understandings of
network mechanisms and skating to where the puck was like between 2
and 12 years ago which leaves us the people in this room
and people like us who hold the technological means of production and
would like to use it to do something different and I will
be honest like saying this kind of thing which I have been
saying in a lot of places for a long time has felt
like kicking people who were already down because they're under res
ourced and overtaxed open source developers or they
're stuck inside corporations with their own perverse incentives or they
're people who have a lot of really good ideas but haven
't had the technical means to turn those into something they can
show other people but there are two things happening right now that
maybe make this moment different for some of us and the first
is that decentralized protocols are a live force now with a bigger
user base and more attention than we have ever seen the atmosphere
is a dev friendly pro experimentation zone with so much room for
trying things the second factor is that writing code has always been
difficult and time consuming and therefore quite expensive along one axis or
another and that appears to be changing quite quickly which can go
several ways and will but the the models and the generators seem
to be making a lot of previously high learning curve high time
commitment prototyping and experimentation vastly easier to get into and when
I wrote this I felt like that was still sort of speculative
and then we moved closer to the conference and I was like
oh it's really happening I got here and I was like
oh okay and this gives people who have been thinking hard about
the effects our networks of the effects of our networks a chance
to kind of rotate in and start prototyping and building and
it also I think gives long-time developers more time and freedom
to put into stuff that's actually good for us as organisms
and communities of organisms therefore I want to bring you some research
threads and hopes and provocations which we will mostly adapt from
the wonderful world of kelp I need to turn your attention
to macroalgae or macroalgae for the Brits
in the audience specifically to kelp and specifically to the subt
lest and least showy parts of kelp which are its
holdfasts holdfasts are the structural
support systems that kel
p and other microalgae and also a bunch of little
sessile which is a beautiful word for non-mobile
sea creatures evolved to cling on to the sea floor or even
to like bigger shellfish with such strength that they can hold
on and flourish in deep water and in the roughest most
turbulent intertidal zones and the reason by the way that
I tend to pull so heavily from the natural world and our
interactions with it is that the world has kind of figured a
lot of shit out in a lot of ways and I think
leaving all of those models of complexity on the table is goofy
and also kelp is awesome so kelp and and it
's holdfast do three things that I think could be very
useful for us to think about they anchor entire communities into stability
and they create permeable respite and sturdy shelter for all
kinds of weirdos both first up in their fronds and
down at the interface between the bedrock and the sea so
the first thing I want to bring is the idea of anch
oring networks and humans I think we could work toward reciprocal integration
of rich sources of human knowledge you know we know that news
organizations have tried to adapt to the distribution changes that our networks
have forced on them but the networks needs and affordances keep
shifting so like getting good at seo worked for a while
with constant recalibration and then ai summaries have
just cratered that experience for news orgs which is going
to shut down newsrooms and already is getting integrated into social
platforms worked pretty well until meta's properties started deprioritizing
news and twitter turned into x and started hiding links and i
know that folks here today are psyched about getting journalists and
news orgs onto the protocol but we're going to have
to make it worth their while and demonstrate that there's a
long game here that's going to be beneficial to them rather
than a short period of reciprocity followed by a shift to
either extraction or exclusion and part of that is going to be
based on whether or not people in the protocol are actually engaging
with news and knowledge as i suspect although i have no data
for this is higher on blue sky and various other skies than
uh on other platforms um and also we need to tell whether
people in the protocol or encourage people in the protocol are engaging
with that rather than treating links and headlines like trading cards to
signal membership or confirm the truth of our already stated positions so
this is a long way to say we should try to get
people to actually read what they're sharing and the the current
state there is not great uh nature analysis of 35 billion facebook
posts i know it's facebook but uh that had links showed
that three quarters of the time people shared links they hadn't
clicked through let alone read the article they were sharing um and
the presence of sharing cues just the existence of a queue might
you want to share this also makes people measurably worse
at discerning true things from false things uh or as
the researchers put it the social media context interferes with truth
discernment um so social media encounters as we see them on
the big centralized platforms seem to push interactions with news not just
from knowing things to knowing kind of about things but from knowing
about things to signaling that we might know about them uh which
is getting really far away from the knowledge itself which i mean
i've been on the internet that tracks but um if we
wanted to move toward better integration and more reciprocity with knowledge
collecting institutions because if no one's clicking it's not helping
them uh what would we do so for blue sky and black
sky and north sky and probably various other skies um y'all
are already ahead by not doing things that are actively hostile to
knowledge like hiding links and de-prioritizing news and analysis
there's probably also room to think about some remediation um
i will start here with my least favorite intervention which is the
nudge the nudge to read before sharing i find this
highly annoying um but i think it's interesting that it does
seem to change behavior at least in the short term uh twitter
's comms team claimed in 2020 that when they did a
little want to read this before retweeting it nudge
they got a 40 boost in article opening we don't know
what went into people's brains but we know that happened that
's not nothing and as skeptical as i am about nudges
all friction is perhaps not terrible there's a study from just
this past winter that looked quite carefully at friction the nudge
and found that a very very light touch of friction so just
a very occasional intervention plus a tiny quiz really improved information quality
by like a third just doing the friction made people stop sharing
things as much it didn't improve the quality of the the
knowledge on the network but the share friction plus a little bit
of engaging analytical thought actually increased the quality according to the studies
measures by about a third which is so much but i should
say the caveat is that this study was done using a simulation
so it's kind of like reading you know the headline that
's like scientists cure cancer in mice but even as with the
mouse effect right like they're interesting mice so you know like
adding friction is never going to fully reverse the directional movement of
a system that leans toward virality and towards toward first
mover advantage and towards signaling versus understanding so what would it like
to what would it look like to move that problem upstream what
would a system look like that actually centrally attended to community
knowledge and reciprocity what would it do when a user in
such a system encountered something that appears to be for instance news
or analysis maybe it would open an article or the video or
whatever and suggest finding a good clip or a quote to share
which could improve the quality of shared information and perhaps get more
of it into the sharers brains maybe it would automatically add
sources mentioned in posts that people bookmark or a fave
to a reading or watch list that they can return to to
help fight the anxiety producing ephemerality that keeps information
seekers doom scrolling maybe it could offer a tiny even machine generated
summary and some context cues about the source that provide enough trust
signal from people with broadly strong reputations for a given
local cluster to pull attention away from worthless content farms and miss
info peddlers and toward journalists and creators with integrity like
or maybe god help us it would ask us to answer a
question about the material in the article which i actually i've
flipped like i'd love that i'm fully ready to leader
board knowledge as a countermeasure to the current mode of
leaderboarding the lowest common denominator like let's go but the
right move obviously depends on a specific project's values and goals
but i think this is the right level to consider it back
in the architecture of a social internet system rather than as like
aftermarket fixes and having seen yesterday's science track like those
folks are way ahead of everyone else on this so
next cool kelp fact kelp makes slower calmer zones
for us i think we could make slower calmer zones that
help our people keep them from being overwhelmed by network tides
and there are two ways to look at this um first i
want to say like kelp forests are super biodiverse they
're a very rich community they're up there with coral reefs
on um the the biodiversity and what we call productivity um as
a system and they do two things roughly that help them be
such an important sheltering force the first is up in the
water column uh where the kelp fronds and blades calm
and slow and deflect the very strong currents that surround kelp
forests creating calmer and less turbulent spaces where other organisms can
thrive the second is down in the hold fasts themselves the
structures that wrap around and latch onto the sturdiest anchor
they can are actually the most thriving part of the community they
shelter hundreds of mobile and sessile invertebrate
species so they're like the critical infrastructure for kelp busy
town i want to take these one at a time first up
in the water column where the the tides are moving fast
but perhaps our network's affordances could provide a little bit
of cognitive and emotional traffic calming so something i've been watching
for a long time and especially this year is that every time
something happens you know whether it's someone dropping an album or
a natural disaster happening or ice shooting someone in my country um
there is an instant hyper proliferation of chatter about it on
the networks that comes online around the same time as live posting
an eyewitness video or spot analysis and then you get
the local and specialist coverage and then you get the national and
international coverage and the next morning the think tanks wake up and
and get moving on it and this is always expanding but we
don't really have a corresponding moment of synthesis or contraction of
all of that stuff into something that is intelligible to a
reasonable person like this is wild to me but you still like
we can't just go to our networks or really anywhere speaking
in general knowledge terms i understand the scientists may have this better
um and find just like uh an event node that connects all
the sources of relevant information and the the opinions of people we
care about in one place like we have reporters who can sort
of do this high-speed gallop through the relevant context at
the beginning of every article they write and then the next day
they wake up and they write another article it's all super
atomized there's nothing to bring it together um if you
want to build a knowledge molecule you have to do it with
your own brain or you can glom on to someone in
the creator or interpreter class some of whom are genuinely like genuinely
world-class super gifted analysts and some of whom are basically semi-
deranged street preachers and not everyone can tell the difference
all the time so uplifting and reciprocating our gifted
interpreters is necessary and i hope we're going to hear
more about that this weekend but it also seems to me that
we really could get the machines involved in bundling up all
of this noise into intelligible collections of material that we could
actually learn through and refer to so it's not so insist
ently ephemeral and scattered and if this sounds like res
uscitating the dream of structured data it kind of is um
but i want to put it in service of ordinary people uh
using tech we didn't have before and signals from social that
can make this stuff more than like a terrible index um and
it's odd to me that we have all of these recommendation
algorithms working in variously pro and anti-social ways but as
far as i can tell we haven't effectively brought our social
tech to the work of orientation or reorientation in any
structured way as again the science cluster is ably demonstrating we
can develop features that cluster and amplify the knowledge people assemble we
can do it with machine learning and human curation probably both
of them we could give our communities the tools to do this
for their areas of interest or their physical localities or their
specializations and we could exist we could extend existing work on
community moderation to rule certain knowledge associations in or out but if
we only do this work for highly motivated specialists we're missing
the chance to bring that fire to everyone else and i will
now embarrass my old journalism world friend tyler fisher and say
that i think his work with sill is admirable and a
really good start toward this um and some things about the the
next area i want to talk about which is mitigating the
cognitive and emotional effects of processing so many different emotional registers in
one place um i think we could give our embodied human cells
a break if we were to find a way to split rhet
orical registers at the point of reader viewer contact this is
what i mean we go online because we're bored or we
're lonely or we want to see what people are talking about
um either in a professional or a very unprofessional way
but what most of us get when we come online is this
amazing puree of like jokes and infighting and scary news
and hustling and entertaining nonsense and dumb memes and video evidence
of war crimes and i think this is genuinely not good for
us uh there's a lot of evidence about this but honestly
it's kind of weird i wanted it to be stronger um
there is a study about how rough context switching is for our
ability to understand things but it's mostly focused on format so
it's like hard to go from video to text uh which
is fine but uh not not the same thing there's this
really fun paper about three with three studies from a couple of
professors of advertising um that found that scrolling instagram for 30 seconds
uh essentially makes us weak to ads um but especially to ads
that uh have high social signals so we're switching from a
more analytical mode to heuristic processing and if a lot
of people appear to have liked the thing uh we're more
likely to just buy whatever nonsense it is the same paper also
includes uh another experiment showing the people who scroll their social feed
for a very brief period also immediately got worse at math and
sentence diagramming so that's fun um but that's just
one paper uh and there are a few others but they're
not necessarily generalizable so i want to be careful i think
we do have two really helpful bodies here of indirect evidence one
is the quite beefy body of work on transportive communication
stuff that transports us which is behind a bunch of the
like power of storytelling stuff um but essentially things that feel transport
ive including a lot of first person testimony really reduce skepticism
and analytical thought and there's a solid pool of evidence and
theory they're kind of just waiting for someone to step in
and work on the effects of trying to move between the transport
ive and just like quotidian newsy stuff registers in rapid
succession over and over again in the same place but the second
thing we have is again like the evidence of our senses i
think there are a few people having a good time in the
political news zone on the social internet i think there are journalism
and policy people who mostly treat the networks like a brief mean
linkedin which works out well for them and then there are
a lot of people including people in positions of extraordinary power who
treat the experience of modern life and the suffering of others as
a spectator blood sport and i do not think that that
mode in particular is good or even neutral i think it will
we will not fix the problems with our governance if we continue
to allow it to metastasize through our civic life
but for the rest of us this stuff is just exhausting and
alienating and it does things to our brains that we don
't like and i want to briefly bring in joshua
myrowitz do we have other myrowitz heads in
the crowd he wrote no sense of place in 1986 oh my
god i'm gonna write so many blog posts about josh
ua myrowitz for you so he's this media scholar
whose ideas informed dana boyd and alice marwick
's work on context collapse but he was writing in the mid
80s which makes this a little unsettling to me he
wrote the current merging of situations by which he means places doesn
't give us a sum of what we had before but rather
new synthesized behaviors that are qualitatively different if we celebrate
our child's wedding in an isolated situation where it is the
sole experience of the day then our joy may be unbound
ed but when on our way to the wedding we hear over
the car radio of a devastating earthquake or the death of a
popular entertainer or the assassination of a political figure we not
only lose our ability to rejoice fully but also our ability to
mourn deeply unbounded joy and unmitigated
misery cannot coexist in the same place in time the situations merge
the hot flush and the icy stare blend into a middle region
cool and for myrowitz's cool i would substitute numb
now some communities in the decentralized space have tried to deal with
this by asking people to either content warn their posts based on
the whole panoply of their readers potential sensitivities or
to divide their expression into separate accounts and i think these people
are working from good instincts but from the wrong end of the
problem given how alienating and anti-convivial it is
to be instructed to pre-process your emotional utterances for people
you may not even be speaking to but i think we could
make this work on the other end and i i want to
say if we do it successfully it will be because we recognize
that we cannot rely on like civility forward sentiment analysis that
for instance reads black americans speaking in a neutral register as
aggressive doing it well would involve grounding in community and doing a
lot of training work which would have to be shared across a
willing group i don't want to undersell the difficulty but
being able to come online and see a morning experience that starts
with like hi friends it's puppy pictures and selfies and not
have the hard news come online until like after the caffeine kicks
in i think this would be transformative and like for me when
i'm working i would love to be able to filter in
posts that match the register i'm working in and hold the
puppies and beefs for later i would like to think about
this less as feed switching and more like a radio dial always
the people that we like but with the option to filter different
registers in and out to suit different emotional capacities and allow for
some separation so those are some thoughts about working on this stuff
uh in kind of lateral ways up in the big open world
of the water column and now i want to talk about the
other thing the most vibrant part of the kelp forest is
in the hold fasts which act like roots but kind of
in reverse instead of pulling resources out of the soil they push
benefits out to every living thing around them by providing a firmly
anchored structure that offers complex and variegated shelter for
both the charismatic invertebrates with all the little flow
y parts and also the tiny snails and worms and all
the other beloved lobies of the kelp forest so um
one more joshua myrowitz quote um from 1986
for every moment of our lives there are things happening someplace that
would upset us that would involve us that would drain our energies
and engage our feelings there are more things that if present and
interview we would feel compelled to respond to or do something about
than could possibly fit into the sane experience of a single lifetime
situation segregation however acts as a psychosocial shock absorber
by selectively exposing ourselves to events and other people we control
the flow of our actions and emotions compassion empathy and even ethics
may be more situationally bound than we often care to think
i love this guy um i feel this in the way that
i participate in the online world um i think we need space
to think and feel together that isn't always fully in the
current and i feel like probably everybody here gets this um it
also produces the benefit also i think we understand the benefit of
not having to send people off protocol into discords and group
chats um whenever they need to do that work uh the spaces
work that the blue sky team has been um publishing about is
going to unlock so many affordances for pro-social things that
go well beyond private accounts i cannot tell you how excited i
am about this um but i also want to make a note
i think letting people huddle up inside an anchoring
structure also undercuts both the need for and the value of
mobbing as territorial defense and i think that's something very
real on the networks right now and that also came up in
the science track yesterday if you and your community have a cave
or a building or a little sheltering trees to step into
to get out of the broad featureless plane with everyone in
it filled with many other communities some of whom will always hate
you uh you're not going to have to constantly make up
for your lack of shelter by continuously contesting every millimeter of
cultural boundary you can just sidestep it this is so
low level that i think it's honestly hard to find ways
to talk about but i think we have to to solve these
problems i would like to suggest as a completely unqualified non-
anthropologist that the entire known history of humans coming together
in groups larger than a few families has involved making buildings of
one kind or another and then elaborating those buildings fairly quickly
with rooms and divisions because our structures out in the physical world
don't just shield us from the environment they also give us
necessary shelter from each other which probably brings the murder rate down
among other things so i said earlier that i would revisit the
illusion of explanatory depth which is essentially a pervasive cognitive
con that all our brains are running all the time by leading
us to believe that we understand things about the world that we
actually do not and we don't know that we don't
know until we have to explain something or fix something and then
it's not there um if i had an extra 10 minutes
i would absolutely ask you each to turn to the person next
to you and explain how a flush toilet works i've worked
on flush toilets i was so wrong it was very upsetting this
is usually okay as long as we have reliable sources to refer
back to but it's extremely bad when we don't i
read a lot about this in the landslide essay and i
'll link the relevant research but the upshot is that for
people who care about knowledge we need to know that we we
don't know very much in our brains actually and that our
knowledge is not just embodied but also genuinely social and networked
which means that the quality of knowledge in our networks when it
goes down we all get less knowledgeable and we all get less
capable and i would argue that we all get less free and
this is why everything i'm suggesting today centers on treating ordinary
people as subjects with agency who deserve workable access to good
information in reasonable environments rather than treating them as consumers whose purpose
is to be a manipulable object the science folks from
yesterday are already demonstrating the protocol can be used to do knowledge
consolidating and brain preserving work but if we don't bring
those goods to everyone at all levels we're going to lose
our democracies all of which are predicated on the existence
of at least minimally informed civic community who are subjects with
agency so i've got i've got one more cool kel
p fact for you at least you'll have the kelp
facts even if nothing else carries forward kelp are way older
than we thought until a few years ago they thought we thought
they were only 14 million years ago because we found a kel
p fossil and it was 14 million years old but then this
amateur fossil collector um down in washington state cracked open so
rocks he found on the beach and found something that looked a
lot like a fossilized holdfast so he sent it down
to the ancient kelp dating nerds at uc ber
keley and the new fossils were around 32 million years old and
this is important because it means that the kelp evolved way
before all the species that now shelter in their fronds and
their hold fasts and became a foundation species without which all
that other life would have been impossible put another way their presence
and the affordances they offered bent the future around them in
ways that we now find beautiful and valuable and good to me
the point of working toward knowledge anchoring and against continuous turbulence
and trouble is not just short term as a respite or
a little pocket oasis for us and our friends but toward
a genuinely more workable way to think and know together where
together is going to include billions of humans and also many forms
of machine assistance and this moment is our window for bending the
future around our hopes and values that cherish knowledge and communal knowing
and that orient us toward real remedies for some of our most
ancient information and troubles and pains uh in service of living together
in peace and mutual respect thank
you truly
truly uh leaning toward the wrong mic um if you're working
on this stuff if you care about working on this stuff let
's talk like that's why i'm here i gave this
talk so they'd let me in the door um but i
i want to talk to people who are actually trying to fix
this thank you thank you thank you